# Analysis-Scripts for ''Single-neuron mechanisms of neural adaptation in the human temporal lobe''

## Data & dependencies
1. Sorted Spiking and behavioral data are stored in `sessions.mat` (~5GB, download here: [https://1drv.ms/u/s!Ar6O6_m2VBtAj712lxxl7UDK_yXFog?e=UFAwCN](https://1drv.ms/u/s!Ar6O6_m2VBtAj712lxxl7UDK_yXFog?e=UFAwCN))
2. Segmented intracranial EEG traces are stored in `ieeg_linked_mastoids_256Hz.mat` (~5GB, download here: [https://1drv.ms/u/s!Ar6O6_m2VBtAj711FhG96G3eQuH_JA?e=3qeLKp](https://1drv.ms/u/s!Ar6O6_m2VBtAj711FhG96G3eQuH_JA?e=3qeLKp))  
3. Trialwise firing rates averaged over baseline and response period are stored in `zvals_trials_and_pre_trial.mat`(~2.5 GB, download here: [https://1drv.ms/u/s!Ar6O6_m2VBtAj75atM1RbsgBKP4Ohg?e=L5xdgF](https://1drv.ms/u/s!Ar6O6_m2VBtAj75atM1RbsgBKP4Ohg?e=L5xdgF)
3. Some scripts in this repository depend on scripts that can be found here: [https://github.com/mormannlab/common_analysis_scripts](https://github.com/mormannlab/common_analysis_scripts)
4. Plots in Figure 2C and 2D use the IOSR toolbox: [https://github.com/IoSR-Surrey/MatlabToolbox](https://github.com/IoSR-Surrey/MatlabToolbox)

## Paths and startup.m
It is assumed that there is one directory with the data mentioned above (1. Sorted Spikes, 2. iEEG), one for the scripts in this repo, and one for the abovementioned `common_analysis_scripts`. To adjust these paths to your situation, edit `startup.m` and run it once at startup of matlab.

## Behavioral Results & Figure 1B
1. `BehaviorAggregate.m` generates the file `reactiontimes_primed_control_category.mat` from `sessions.mat`.
2. Figure1cBehaviorAnalyses.m` outputs stats in the MATALB prompt and generate `Figure1B.png`.

## iEEG ERPs
1. Figure1cERPs.m` generates the figure `Figure1C.png` from `ieeg_linked_mastoids_256Hz.mat`.
2. `ERPsLatencyAnalysesSITable1.m` prints output to terminal that was used for Supporting Information Table 1. 

## Single units tuning curves
1. `CalcuateReponses.m` calculates the response criterion and determines whether a unit responds to a stimulus. 
2. `Figure2ASUExamples.m` reads `sessions.mat` and generates `.tif` files in the `su_examples` subdirectory to the main directory of this script folder. `ospr_su_example_3628_LPHC.tif` is used in Figure 2A. 
3. `CalculateTuningCurves.m` reads `zvals_condition.mat`and generates `tuningCurvesMin[N]ResponsesPerUnit.mat` where `N`is the minimun number of stimuli the unit responds to as defined in step 1 above.
4. `Figure2BPlotTuningCurves.m` generates  `Figure2BTuningCurvesMin[N]Resps.png` where `N`is the minimun number of stimuli the unit responds to. Note `N = 4` was used for Figure 2B. Use N = 2/3 for Supplementary Figure 1. Set the variable `suppFigure7` to `true` to plot Supplementary Figure 7 (raw firing rates in Hz as dependent measure).
5. `PrepareTuningCurvesDataForSpss.m` generates `FiringRatesByRankCondition.csv`, which re-arranges the data in `tuningCurvesMin4ResponsesPerUnit.mat` long format to be further processed wiht SPSS or R for the ANOVA as specified in the manuscript.
6. `firingRatesByRankCondition.sps` is an SPSS script file that does the Condition (primed, control) X Stimulus Rank (1,2,3,4) X Anatomical Region (AM, otherMTL) ANOVA on z-scored and raw firing rates reported in the main text and in Supplementary Table 2. It loads `FiringRatesByRankCondition.csv` and stores the output in SPSS viewer file (`FiringRatesByRankCondition.spv`).

## Single units firing latencies and burst duration
1. `CalcuatePrimingResponses.m` calculates the response criterion separate for the 5 trials in the primed and the 5 trials in the control condition. 
2. `CalculateFiringLatencies.m` runs p-burst on spiking data of units significantly responding in the primed and the control condition. Results are stored in `priming_latencies_min1responsesperunit.mat`.
3. `Figure2CDLatencies.m` reads the above output and generates `Figure2C_BurstDuration_primed_vs_control_1_resps.png` and `Figure2D_Latency_primed_vs_control_1_resps.png` which contain statistical analyses and plots dipslayed in the Figures 2C and 2D. 

## Supplementary Figures & Analyses
1. Supplementary Figure 1 is generated by setting parameters accordingly (see also above under Figure2B)
2. Supplementary Figure 2 is generated with `SupplementaryFigure2CorrRtsWithRankDifferencesInSUFiring.m`
3. Supplementary Figure 3 is generated with `SupplementaryFigure3and6CorrRtsiEEGSU.m`
4. Supplementary Figure 4 is generated with `SupplementaryFigure4RSAsPrimeTargetSimilarity.m`. This function also generates the `trialDataPrimeTargetSimilarity.csv`, which is then further analysed with SPSS (`trialDataPrimeTargetSimilarity.sps`) to assess whehter high vs. low-similarity primes affect firing of targets differently.
5. Supplementary Figure 5 is generated with `SupplementaryFigure5PrestimulusActivity.m`
6. Supplementary Figure 6 is generated with `SupplementaryFigure3and6CorrRtsiEEGSU.m`

